README.md, before:

<h1 align="center" style="font-size: 36px">RoutingKit</h1>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://pub.dev/packages/routingkit"><img alt="Pub Version" src="https://img.shields.io/pub/v/routingkit?logo=dart"/></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/medz/routingkit/actions/workflows/test.yml"><img alt="Test" src="https://github.com/medz/routingkit/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg?branch=main" /></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/medz/routingkit?tab=MIT-1-ov-file"><img alt="License" src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/medz/routingkit" /></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/medz"><img alt="Sponsors" src="https://img.shields.io/github/sponsors/medz?logo=githubsponsors" /></a>
  <a href="https://twitter.com/shiweidu"><img alt="X (formerly Twitter) Follow" src="https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/shiweidu" /></a>
</p>

<p align="center">
RoutingKit - A lightweight, high-performance router for Dart with an elegant object-oriented API.
</p>

## Features

- 🚀 **High Performance**: Optimized route matching using a trie-based structure
- 🧩 **Flexible Routes**: Support for static, parameterized, and wildcard routes
- 💪 **Type Safety**: Generic typing for your route handlers
- 🔍 **Comprehensive Matching**: Find single or all matching routes
- 🧰 **Object-Oriented API**: Clean, chainable methods for route management

## Installation

Run this command:

```bash
dart pub add routingkit
```

With Flutter:

```bash
flutter pub add routingkit
```

## Usage

### Creating a Router

```dart
import 'package:routingkit/routingkit.dart';

// Create a typed router (recommended)
final router = createRouter<String>();

// For handling different data types
final dynamicRouter = createRouter<dynamic>();
```

### Adding Routes

RoutingKit supports various route patterns:

```dart
// Static routes
router.add('GET', '/users', 'Users list handler');

// Parameter routes (with named parameters)
router.add('GET', '/users/:id', 'User details handler');

// Multiple parameters
router.add('GET', '/users/:id/posts/:postId', 'User post handler');

// Optional format parameter
router.add('GET', '/files/:filename.:format?', 'File handler');

// Wildcard routes
router.add('GET', '/assets/**', 'Static assets handler');

// Named wildcard segments
router.add('GET', '/docs/**:path', 'Documentation handler');

// Method-specific routes
router.add('POST', '/users', 'Create user handler');
router.add('PUT', '/users/:id', 'Update user handler');
router.add('DELETE', '/users/:id', 'Delete user handler');
```

### Matching Routes

Find the first matching route:

```dart
final match = router.find('GET', '/users/123');

if (match != null) {
  print('Handler: ${match.data}');
  print('Parameters: ${match.params}'); // {id: 123}
}
```

Find all matching routes (useful for middleware):

```dart
final matches = router.findAll('GET', '/users/123/settings');

for (final match in matches) {
  print('Handler: ${match.data}');
  print('Parameters: ${match.params}');
}
```

### Removing Routes

```dart
// Remove a specific route
router.remove('GET', '/users/:id');

// Remove all routes for a specific method
router.remove('POST', null);
```

## Example Applications

### HTTP Server Routing

```dart
import 'dart:io';
import 'package:routingkit/routingkit.dart';

void main() async {
  final router = createRouter<Function>();
  
  // Define routes with handler functions
  router.add('GET', '/', (req, res) => res.write('Home page'));
  router.add('GET', '/users', (req, res) => res.write('Users list'));
  router.add('GET', '/users/:id', (req, res) => res.write('User ${req.params['id']}'));
  
  final server = await HttpServer.bind('localhost', 8080);
  print('Server running on http://localhost:8080');
  
  await for (final request in server) {
    final response = request.response;
    final path = request.uri.path;
    final method = request.method;
    
    final match = router.find(method, path);
    
    if (match != null) {
      final handler = match.data;
      // Add params to request for handler access
      (request as dynamic).params = match.params;
      handler(request, response);
    } else {
      response.statusCode = HttpStatus.notFound;
      response.write('404 Not Found');
    }
    
    await response.close();
  }
}
```

## For AI Assistance

RoutingKit includes an `llms.txt` file at the root of the repository. This file is specifically designed to help Large Language Models (LLMs) understand the project structure and functionality.

If you're using AI tools like GitHub Copilot, Claude, or ChatGPT to work with this codebase, you can point them to the `llms.txt` file for better context and more accurate assistance.

```dart
// Example: Asking an AI about the project
"Please read the llms.txt file in this repository to understand the RoutingKit structure"
```

The file provides AI-friendly documentation including:
- Project overview and core concepts
- Code structure explanation
- API reference and examples
- Links to relevant implementation files

## Migration from v4.x

See the [Migration Guide](https://github.com/medz/routingkit/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#migration-guide) in the changelog.

## License

RoutingKit is open-sourced software licensed under the [MIT license](https://github.com/medz/routingkit?tab=MIT-1-ov-file).

Commit message:

Enhance HTTP method normalization and route handling
- Implement case-insensitive HTTP method normalization
- Add support for complex format parameter patterns like ':filename.:format?'
- Improve route matching priority and handling of parameter routes
- Refactor route finding and collection logic for better performance and clarity
- Update README with HTTP method normalization example

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center" style="font-size: 36px">RoutingKit</h1>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://pub.dev/packages/routingkit"><img alt="Pub Version" src="https://img.shields.io/pub/v/routingkit?logo=dart"/></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/medz/routingkit/actions/workflows/test.yml"><img alt="Test" src="https://github.com/medz/routingkit/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg?branch=main" /></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/medz/routingkit?tab=MIT-1-ov-file"><img alt="License" src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/medz/routingkit" /></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/medz"><img alt="Sponsors" src="https://img.shields.io/github/sponsors/medz?logo=githubsponsors" /></a>
  <a href="https://twitter.com/shiweidu"><img alt="X (formerly Twitter) Follow" src="https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/shiweidu" /></a>
</p>

<p align="center">
RoutingKit - A lightweight, high-performance router for Dart with an elegant object-oriented API.
</p>

## Features

- 🚀 **High Performance**: Optimized route matching using a trie-based structure
- 🧩 **Flexible Routes**: Support for static, parameterized, and wildcard routes
- 💪 **Type Safety**: Generic typing for your route handlers
- 🔍 **Comprehensive Matching**: Find single or all matching routes
- 🧰 **Object-Oriented API**: Clean, chainable methods for route management

## Installation

Run this command:

```bash
dart pub add routingkit
```

With Flutter:

```bash
flutter pub add routingkit
```

## Usage

### Creating a Router

```dart
import 'package:routingkit/routingkit.dart';

// Create a typed router (recommended)
final router = createRouter<String>();

// For handling different data types
final dynamicRouter = createRouter<dynamic>();
```

### Adding Routes

RoutingKit supports various route patterns:

```dart
// Static routes
router.add('GET', '/users', 'Users list handler');

// Parameter routes (with named parameters)
router.add('GET', '/users/:id', 'User details handler');

// Multiple parameters
router.add('GET', '/users/:id/posts/:postId', 'User post handler');

// Optional format parameter
router.add('GET', '/files/:filename.:format?', 'File handler');

// Wildcard routes
router.add('GET', '/assets/**', 'Static assets handler');

// Named wildcard segments
router.add('GET', '/docs/**:path', 'Documentation handler');

// Method-specific routes
router.add('POST', '/users', 'Create user handler');
router.add('PUT', '/users/:id', 'Update user handler');
router.add('DELETE', '/users/:id', 'Delete user handler');
```

### Matching Routes

Find the first matching route:

```dart
final match = router.find('GET', '/users/123');

if (match != null) {
  print('Handler: ${match.data}');
  print('Parameters: ${match.params}'); // {id: 123}
}
```

Find all matching routes (useful for middleware):

```dart
final matches = router.findAll('GET', '/users/123/settings');

for (final match in matches) {
  print('Handler: ${match.data}');
  print('Parameters: ${match.params}');
}
```

### Removing Routes

```dart
// Remove a specific route
router.remove('GET', '/users/:id');

// Remove all routes for a specific method
router.remove('POST', null);
```

### HTTP Method Handling

RoutingKit automatically normalizes HTTP methods to uppercase. This means that methods like 'get', 'GET', or 'Get' are all treated as 'GET'. This follows the HTTP specification and makes the router more robust.

```dart
router.add('get', '/users', 'get-users');  // Will be normalized to 'GET'
router.add('POST', '/users', 'post-users'); // Will be normalized to 'POST'

// All these will match the same route
router.find('get', '/users');   // Matches
router.find('GET', '/users');   // Matches
router.find('Get', '/users');   // Matches
```

## Example Applications

### HTTP Server Routing

```dart
import 'dart:io';
import 'package:routingkit/routingkit.dart';

void main() async {
  final router = createRouter<Function>();
  
  // Define routes with handler functions
  router.add('GET', '/', (req, res) => res.write('Home page'));
  router.add('GET', '/users', (req, res) => res.write('Users list'));
  router.add('GET', '/users/:id', (req, res) => res.write('User ${req.params['id']}'));
  
  final server = await HttpServer.bind('localhost', 8080);
  print('Server running on http://localhost:8080');
  
  await for (final request in server) {
    final response = request.response;
    final path = request.uri.path;
    final method = request.method;
    
    final match = router.find(method, path);
    
    if (match != null) {
      final handler = match.data;
      // Add params to request for handler access
      (request as dynamic).params = match.params;
      handler(request, response);
    } else {
      response.statusCode = HttpStatus.notFound;
      response.write('404 Not Found');
    }
    
    await response.close();
  }
}
```

## For AI Assistance

RoutingKit includes an `llms.txt` file at the root of the repository. This file is specifically designed to help Large Language Models (LLMs) understand the project structure and functionality.

If you're using AI tools like GitHub Copilot, Claude, or ChatGPT to work with this codebase, you can point them to the `llms.txt` file for better context and more accurate assistance.

```dart
// Example: Asking an AI about the project
"Please read the llms.txt file in this repository to understand the RoutingKit structure"
```

The file provides AI-friendly documentation including:
- Project overview and core concepts
- Code structure explanation
- API reference and examples
- Links to relevant implementation files

## Migration from v4.x

See the [Migration Guide](https://github.com/medz/routingkit/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#migration-guide) in the changelog.

## License

RoutingKit is open-sourced software licensed under the [MIT license](https://github.com/medz/routingkit?tab=MIT-1-ov-file).
